Add-missing-feat: Rearrange AI gateway landing page, add load balancing ref doc (#1446)
Kong/developer.konghq.com: app/ai-gateway/load-balancing.md

---
title: "Load balancing with AI gateway"
layout: reference
content_type: reference

> description: This guide provides an overview of load balancing and retry and fallback strategies in AI Proxy Advanced plugin.retry

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: This guide provides an overview of load balancing and retry and fallback strategies in the AI Proxy Advanced plugin.
```

works_on:
 - on-prem
 - konnect

products:
  - gateway
  - ai-gateway

tags:
  - ai
  - load-balancing

plugins:
  - ai-proxy-advanced

min_version:
  gateway: '3.10'

related_resources:
  - text: Kong AI Gateway
    url: /ai-gateway/
  - text: Kong AI Gateway plugins
    url: /plugins/?category=ai
  - text: "{{site.base_gateway}} load balancing"
    url: /gateway/load-balancing/
  - text: "{{site.base_gateway}} round-robin load balancing"
    url: /gateway/entities/upstream/#round-robin

>   - text: "{{site.base_gateway}} round-robin load balancing"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - text: "{{site.base_gateway}} consistent-hashing load balancing"
```

    url: /gateway/entities/upstream/#consistent-hashing
  - text: "{{site.base_gateway}} least connections load balancing"
    url: /gateway/entities/upstream/#least-connections
  - text: "{{site.base_gateway}} latency load balancing"
    url: /gateway/entities/upstream/#latency

---

> ## Load balancing in AI Gateway

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Duplicate of the H1

With the AI Proxy Advanced plugin, you can select from several load balancing algorithms—similar to those used for Kong upstreams but extended for AI model routing. You configure load balancing using the [Upstream entity](/gateway/entities/upstream/), giving you flexibility to fine-tune how requests are routed to various AI providers and LLM models.

### Load balancing strategies

Kong AI Gateway supports multiple load balancing strategies to optimize traffic distribution across AI models. Each algorithm is suited for different performance goals such as balancing load, improving cache-hit ratios, reducing latency, or ensuring [failover reliability](#retry-and-fallback).

The table below provides a detailed overview of the available algorithms, along with considerations to keep in mind when selecting the best option for your use case.

<!--vale off-->
{% table %}
columns:
  - title: Strategy
    key: strategy
  - title: Description
    key: description
  - title: Considerations
    key: considerations
rows:
  - strategy: "[Round-robin (weighted)](/plugins/ai-proxy-advanced/examples/round-robin/)"
    description: |

>       Distributes requests across models in a circular pattern with weight-based allocation. The [`weight`](/plugins/ai-proxy-advanced/reference/#schema--config-targets-weight) parameter (e.g., `weight: 70`) controls the proportion of traffic sent to each model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      Distributes requests across models in a circular pattern with weight-based allocation. The [`weight`](/plugins/ai-proxy-advanced/reference/#schema--config-targets-weight) parameter (for example, `weight: 70`) controls the proportion of traffic sent to each model.
```
We should avoid latin abbreviations.

    considerations: |
      * Traffic is routed proportionally based on weights.
      * Requests follow a sequence adjusted by weight.
      * Focuses purely on traffic distribution, not cache-hit ratios.
  - strategy: "[Consistent-hashing](/plugins/ai-proxy-advanced/examples/consistent-hashing/)"
    description: |

>       Routes requests based on a hash of a configurable client input, such as a header or user ID. The [`hash_on_header`](/plugins/ai-proxy-advanced/reference/#schema--config-balancer-hash-on-header) setting (e.g., `X-Hashing-Header`) defines the source for the hash and drives all routing decisions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      Routes requests based on a hash of a configurable client input, such as a header or user ID. The [`hash_on_header`](/plugins/ai-proxy-advanced/reference/#schema--config-balancer-hash-on-header) setting (for example, `X-Hashing-Header`) defines the source for the hash and drives all routing decisions.
```

    considerations: |
      * Especially effective with consistent keys like user IDs.
      * Requires diverse hash inputs for balanced distribution.
      * Ideal for maintaining session persistence.
  - strategy: "[Lowest-usage](/plugins/ai-proxy-advanced/examples/lowest-usage/)"
    description: |

>       Routes requests to the least-utilized models based on resource usage metrics. In the configuration, the [`tokens_count_strategy`](/plugins/ai-proxy-advanced/reference/#schema--config-balancer-tokens-count-strategy) (e.g., `prompt-tokens`) defines how usage is measured, focusing on prompt tokens or other resource indicators.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      Routes requests to the least-utilized models based on resource usage metrics. In the configuration, the [`tokens_count_strategy`](/plugins/ai-proxy-advanced/reference/#schema--config-balancer-tokens-count-strategy) (for example, `prompt-tokens`) defines how usage is measured, focusing on prompt tokens or other resource indicators.
```

    considerations: |
      * Dynamically balances load based on measured usage.
      * Useful for optimizing cost and avoiding overloading heavier models.
      * Ensures more efficient resource allocation across available models.
  - strategy: "[Lowest-latency](/plugins/ai-proxy-advanced/examples/lowest-latency/)"
    description: |

>       Routes requests to the models with the lowest observed latency. In the configuration, the [`latency_strategy`](/plugins/ai-proxy-advanced/reference/#schema--config-balancer-latency-strategy) parameter (e.g., `latency_strategy: e2e`) defines how latency is measured, typically based on end-to-end response times.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      Routes requests to the models with the lowest observed latency. In the configuration, the [`latency_strategy`](/plugins/ai-proxy-advanced/reference/#schema--config-balancer-latency-strategy) parameter (for example, `latency_strategy: e2e`) defines how latency is measured, typically based on end-to-end response times.
```

    considerations: |
      * Prioritizes models with the fastest response times.
      * Optimizes for real-time performance in time-sensitive applications.
      * Less suitable for long-lived or persistent connections (e.g., WebSockets).
  - strategy: "[Semantic](/plugins/ai-proxy-advanced/examples/semantic/)"
    description: |

>       Routes requests based on semantic similarity between the prompt and model descriptions. In the configuration, embeddings are generated using a specified model (e.g., `text-embedding-3-small`), and similarity is calculated using vector search.
>     considerations: |
>       * Uses vector search (e.g., Redis) to find the best match based on prompt embeddings.
>       * `distance_metric` and `threshold` settings fine-tune matching sensitivity.
>       * Best for routing prompts to domain-specialized models, like coding, analytics, text generation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      Routes requests based on semantic similarity between the prompt and model descriptions. In the configuration, embeddings are generated using a specified model (e.g., `text-embedding-3-small`), and similarity is calculated using vector search.
    considerations: |
      * Uses vector search (for example, Redis) to find the best match based on prompt embeddings.
      * `distance_metric` and `threshold` settings fine-tune matching sensitivity.
      * Best for routing prompts to domain-specialized models, like coding, analytics, text generation.
```

  - strategy: "[Priority](/plugins/ai-proxy-advanced/examples/priority/)"
    description: |

>       Routes requests to models based on assigned priority groups and weights. In the configuration, models are grouped by priority and can have individual [`weight`](/plugins/ai-proxy-advanced/reference/#schema--config-targets-weight) settings (e.g., `weight: 70` for GPT-4), allowing proportional load distribution within each priority tier.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      Routes requests to models based on assigned priority groups and weights. In the configuration, models are grouped by priority and can have individual [`weight`](/plugins/ai-proxy-advanced/reference/#schema--config-targets-weight) settings (for example, `weight: 70` for GPT-4), allowing proportional load distribution within each priority tier.
```

  - scenario: "Prioritize the lowest-latency target"
    action: "Set [`latency_strategy`](/plugins/ai-proxy-advanced/reference/#schema--config-balancer-latency-strategy) to `e2e`"
    description: |
      Optimize routing based on full end-to-end response time, selecting the target that minimizes total latency.
  - scenario: "Need predictable fallback for the same user"
    action: "Use [`hash_on_header`](/plugins/ai-proxy-advanced/reference/#schema--config-balancer-hash-on-header)"
    description: |
      Ensure that the same user consistently routes to the same target, enabling sticky sessions and reliable fallback behavior.
  - scenario: "Models have different costs"
    action: "Set [`tokens_count_strategy`](/plugins/ai-proxy-advanced/reference/#schema--config-balancer-tokens-count-strategy) to `cost`"
    description: |
      Route requests intelligently by considering cost, balancing model performance with budget optimization.
{% endtable %}
<!--vale on-->

#### Version compatibility for fallbacks

{:.info}
> **{{site.base_gateway}} version compatibility for fallbacks:**
> {% new_in 3.10 %}
> - Full fallback support across targets, even with different API formats.

> > - Mix models from different providers if needed (e.g., OpenAI and Mistral).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> - Mix models from different providers if needed (for example, OpenAI and Mistral).
```
